# Contributing guidelines

This document describes how to contribute to the project.

## Prerequisites

- [go](https://golang.org/dl/) version v1.18+.
- [docker](https://docs.docker.com/install/) version 17.03+.
- [kubectl](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/tools/install-kubectl/) version v1.11.3+.
- [kustomize](https://sigs.k8s.io/kustomize/docs/INSTALL.md) v4+
- Access to a Kubernetes v1.21+ cluster (the easiest way to develop is using [Kind][kind]).

## Contributing steps

1. Submit an issue describing your proposed change to the repo in question.
1. The repo owners will respond to your issue promptly.
1. Fork the desired repo, develop and test your code changes.
1. Submit a pull request.

## How to build RaptorML locally

Note that, by building RaptorML from the source code we are allowed to test the changes made locally.

1. Run the following command to clone your fork of the project locally

    ```
    $ git clone git@github.com:<user>/raptor.git
    ```
2. Build the project locally

    ```
    make build
    ```
   It's also possible to build the docker images locally using the following command:
    ```
    make docker-build
    ```

## Set up a KiND cluster

Run following the command to create a new local cluster with RaptorML installed:

```
make -C hack/dev new-local-cluster
```

This will create a new local cluster with the following components:

- Metrics server
- Ngnix Ingress Controller (exposed to host on ports 80 & 443)
- Redis Operator + Redis Cluster (exposed to host on port 6379)
- Raptor Core + Raptor Historian

See more utilities using the following commands:

```
make -C hack/dev help
```

## Development: running from local environment

Sometimes, it's useful to run RaptorML from a local environment for development and debugging purposes.

1. We need to [set up a local environment first](#set-up-a-kind-cluster).
2. Disable the cluster's controllers and webhooks:
    ```
   make -C hack/dev scale-0
    ```
3. Compile & Run the application (you can use your favorite IDE to compile and debug):
    ```
   go run cmd/raptor/main.go --system-namespace raptor-system --no-webhooks -r :6379
    ```

## What to do before submitting a pull request

1. Run the script `make generate` to update/generate autogenerated files.
2. Run `make test`
3. Run `make test-e2e`

- e2e tests use [`kind`][kind] and [`kustomize`][kustomize]. Make sure that you have the latest versions of these tools
  installed on your machine.

**IMPORTANT:** The `make generate` is very helpful. By using it, you can check if good part of the commands still
working successfully after the changes. Also, note that its usage is a pre-requirement to submit a PR.

Following the targets that can be used to test your changes locally.

| Command           | Description                                             | Is called in the CI? |
|-------------------|---------------------------------------------------------|----------------------|
| make test         | Runs tests                                              | yes                  |
| make test-e2e     | Runs Integration tests                                  | yes                  |
| make lint         | Run [golangci][golangci] lint checks                    | yes                  |
| make lint-fix     | Run [golangci][golangci] to automatically perform fixes | no                   |
| make generate     | Generate autogenerated files                            | yes                  |
| make build        | Build the binaries                                      | yes                  |
| make docker-build | Build docker images                                     | yes                  |
| make kind-load    | Load docker images to local Kind cluster                | no                   |

## PR Process

Every PR should be annotated with an icon indicating whether it's a:

- Breaking change: :warning: (`:warning:`)
- Non-breaking feature: :sparkles: (`:sparkles:`)
- Patch fix: :bug: (`:bug:`)
- Docs: :book: (`:book:`)
- Infra/Tests/Other: :seedling: (`:seedling:`)
- No release note: :ghost: (`:ghost:`)

Use :ghost: (no release note) only for the PRs that change or revert unreleased changes, which don't deserve a release
note. Please don't abuse it.

You can also use the equivalent emoji directly 🙃.

Individual commits should not be tagged separately, but will generally be assumed to match the PR. For instance, if you
have a bugfix in with a breaking change, it's generally encouraged to submit the bugfix separately, but if you must put
them in one PR, mark the commit separately.

## Contributing major changes

Contributing major changes such as new features or refactoring are always welcome! That being said, they require an
extra care for us to be able to review them before merging them. To do this, we need you to:

1. Explain in details the proposed change, including the motivation, the proposed solution, and the architecture(when applicable).
2. Provide at least one example of how to use the proposed change (when applicable; i.e new feature).
3. Write a test for the proposed change (e2e / unit test).

## Where the CI Tests are configured

See the [action files](.github/workflows) to check its tests, and the scripts used on it.

## Profiling

If you find yourself in a need to profile the app, it's possible by adding the following lines to the `main.go`:

```go
mgr.AddMetricsExtraHandler("/debug/pprof/", http.HandlerFunc(pprof.Index))
mgr.AddMetricsExtraHandler("/debug/pprof/cmdline", http.HandlerFunc(pprof.Cmdline))
mgr.AddMetricsExtraHandler("/debug/pprof/profile", http.HandlerFunc(pprof.Profile))
mgr.AddMetricsExtraHandler("/debug/pprof/symbol", http.HandlerFunc(pprof.Symbol))
mgr.AddMetricsExtraHandler("/debug/pprof/trace", http.HandlerFunc(pprof.Trace))
```

## Code of conduct

Participation in the RaptorML community is governed by the [Kubernetes Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md).

[golangci]:https://github.com/golangci/golangci-lint

[kind]:https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/#installation-and-usage

[setup-envtest]:https://book.kubebuilder.io/reference/envtest

[kustomize]: https://sigs.k8s.io/kustomize/docs/INSTALL.md